Ir para o conteúdo principal Ir para o menu de navegação principal Ir para o
rodapé
Open Menu
Logo da Texto Livre

  • Sobre
      □ Sobre a Revista
      □ Submissões
      □ Equipe Editorial
      □ Direitos Autorais
      □ Política contra plágio e más-condutas em pesquisa
      □ Periodicidade
      □ Conflito de interesses
      □ Guia para submissão de figuras
      □ Contato
  • Edição Atual
  • Edições anteriores
  • Indexadores
  • Notícias

[                    ] Buscar
Buscar  
  • Cadastro
  • Acesso

[                    ] Buscar
Buscar  
 1. Início /
 2. Arquivos /
 3. v. 10 n. 2 (2017): Texto Livre: Linguagem e Tecnologia /
 4. Educação e Tecnologia

Ensino de línguas em Blended e Tandem com parceiros brasileiros: modelos de
ensino flexíveis

Autores

  • Ulisses Tadeu Vaz de Oliveira Universidade Federal de Mato Grosso do Sul

DOI:

https://doi.org/10.17851/1983-3652.10.2.123-144

Palavras-chave:

Computer-Assisted Language Learning, blended learning, tandem learning,
Systemic-Functional Linguistics, ICT

Resumo

ABSTRACT: This case study aims at arriving at a thorough understanding of the
complexities at issue for the implementation and development of the
in-curriculum discipline of English in the School of Business and Hospitality
in a Brazilian university targeting internationalization. On top of that, the
program has a technological approach, which is, in other words, the use of
technology (specifically ICT) as pivotal to maximize learning opportunities
through a flexible delivery of instructions. The program was primarily designed
by the approach of blended learning, but this case study also describes a merge
with tandem learning in which it was a pilot project. I initially present
theories that have framed this research. Next, I share my experience teaching
and coordinating the program, and then I make some considerations about
positive aspects and upcoming challenges
KEYWORDS: Computer-Assisted Language Learning; blended learning; tandem
learning; Systemic-Functional Linguistics; ICT.


RESUMO: O presente estudo de caso tem como objetivo chegar a uma extensa
compreensão das complexidades em questão para a implementação e o
desenvolvimento da disciplina curricular de Inglês na Escola de Negócios e
Hospitalidade de uma universidade brasileira, visando a sua
internacionalização. Além disso, o programa tem uma abordagem tecnológica, ou
seja, o uso da tecnologia (especificamente TIC) como elemento crucial para
maximizar oportunidades de aprendizagem através de um modelo flexível de
ensino. O programa foi principalmente desenvolvido com enfoque na abordagem do
blended learning. No entanto, este estudo de caso também descreve uma mesclagem
com o tandem learning num projeto piloto. Inicialmente, são apresentadas as
teorias que enquadram a pesquisa; em seguida, compartilhamos nossa experiência
de ensino e coordenação do programa para, então, fazer algumas considerações
sobre aspectos positivos e desafios futuros.
PALAVRAS-CHAVE: Aprendizagem mediada pelo computador; blended learning; tandem
learning; Linguística Sistêmico-Funcional; TIC.

Downloads

Não há dados estatísticos.

Biografia do Autor

Ulisses Tadeu Vaz de Oliveira, Universidade Federal de Mato Grosso do Sul

Ph.D. in Applied Linguistics and Language Studies from the PUC-São Paulo and
M.A. degree in the same area and university. Work as Associate Professor at
Universidade Federal de Mato Grosso do Sul (UFMS) teaching subjects on the
scope of Linguistics and English for undergraduate and postgraduate students.
Previously, worked as Assistant Professor at Universidade Federal da Grande
Dourados (UFGD), and was English lecturer and the Coordinator of LEP (Laureate
English Program) of Laureate International Universities in the School of
Business & Hospitality at the University Anhembi Morumbi. During that time,
taught English to Marketing, Business Administration, International Trade,
Hospitality and International Relations majors. Ongoing research deals with:
(I) Tandem learning, focusing on ICT in education for In-curriculum disciplines
and Content & Language Integrated Learning (CLIL) for undergraduate students;
(II) ideology and persuasion within the theoretical framework of the
Systemic-Functional Linguistics; and (III) Portuguese Philology and diachronic
studies involving medieval Galaic-Portuguese chants with a special regard to
language and historical studies of both Iberian and Brazilian societies. 

Referências

ALJAAFREH, A.; Lantolf, J. P. Negative feedback as regulation and second
language learning in the zone of proximal development. The Modern Language
Journal, 78(4), p. 465-483, 1994.

ANTHONY, L. Defining English for specific purposes and the role of the ESP
practitioner, 1997. Available in: http://www.laurenceanthony.net/abstracts/
Aizukiyo97.pdf. Retrieved: November 2015.

BAPORIKAR, N. 21st Century Higher Education Trends in Sultanate of Oman.
Strategic Role of Tertiary Education and Technologies for Sustainable
Competitive Advantage. Hershey, PA, 2013, p. 140-155.

BAUMEISTER, R. F.; LEARY, M. R. The need to belong: desire for interpersonal
attachments as a fundamental human motivation. Psychological bulletin,
University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign, 117(3), p. 497, 1995.

BEATTY, K. Teaching & researching: Computer-assisted language learning.
Routledge. New York: Pearson ESL, 2013.

BERSIN, J. The blended learning book: Best practices, proven methodologies, and
lessons learned. New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons, 2004.

BONK, C. J., & GRAHAM, C. R. The handbook of blended learning: Global
perspectives, local designs. New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons, 2012.

BOSWOOD, T. New ways of using computers in language teaching. TESOL Series II –
Innovative Classroom Techniques. Alexandria, VA: TESOL Publications, 1997.

BRAMMERTS, H. Language learning in tandem using the Internet. Telecollaboration
in foreign language learning, Hawaii, Honolulu: Second Language Teaching and
Curriculum Centre, 1996, p. 121-130.

BRIERLEY, W. Computers as a tool in Language Teaching. Ellis Horwood Series on
Computers and Their Applications. New York: Ellis Horwood, 1991.

BRUNER, J. Child's talk: Learning to use language. Child Language Teaching and
Therapy, London: Sage, 1(1), p. 111-114., 1985.

CLEVELAND-INNES, M. F., & GARRISON, D. R. (Eds.). An Introduction to Distance
Education. Understanding teaching and learning in a new era. New York:
Routledge. 2010, p. 13-26.

DIAZ, R. M., NEAL, C. J., & AMAYA-WILLIAMS, M. The social origins of
self-regulation. In: Vygotsky and education: Instructional implications and
applications of sociohistorical psychology, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press 1990, p. 127-154,

DUDENEY, G., & Hockly, N. How to Teach English with Technology. China: Longman,
2007.

DUHANEY, D. C. Blended learning in education, training, and development.
Performance Improvement, 43(8), p. 35-38, 2004.

EDIRIPPULIGE, S. et al. Evaluation of E-Learning Practices in Undergraduate
Medical Education: Results of a Survey in Sri Lanka. European Conference on
eHealth 2007, Proceedings of the ECEH 2007, Gesellschaft für Informatik, 2013,
p. 217-224.

EGGINS, S. Introduction to systemic functional linguistics. London: A&C Black,
2004.

FAIRCLOUGH, N. Discourse and Social Change. Cambridge: Polity Press, 1992.

FERGUSON, G.; PÉREZ-LLANTADA, C.; PLO, R. English as an international language
of scientific publication: a study of attitudes. World Englishes, 30(1), 41-59,
2011.

FOWLER, R. Language in the news: discourse and ideology in the press. London:
Routledge, 1991.

GARRISON, D. R., & KANUKA, H. Blended learning: Uncovering its transformative
potential in higher education. The internet and higher education, 7(2), 95-105,
2004.

GAY, G. Culturally responsive teaching: theory, research, and practice. New
York: Teachers College Press, 2000.

GRAHAM, R. Blended Learning Systems: Definition, Current Trends and Future
Directions. California: Academia.edu, 2013.

GURI-ROSENBLIT, S.; GROS, B. E-learning: Confusing terminology, research gaps
and inherent challenges. International Journal of E-Learning & Distance
Education, 25(1), s/p., 2011. Available in: http://ijede.ca/index.php/jde/
article/view/729/1206. Retrieved: December 2017.

GUTH, S.; THOMAS, M. Telecollaboration with Web 2.0 tools. Telecollaboration,
2, p. 39- 68, 2010.

HAKUTA, K.; BUTLER, Y. G.; WITT, D. How long does it take English learners to
attain proficiency?. Policy Report. 2000–1. Santa Barbara: University of
California Linguistic Minority Research Institute, 2000.

HALLIDAY, M. A. Functional grammar. London: Edward Arnold, 1994.

HALLIDAY, M. A.; MATTHIESSEN, C. M. An Introduction to Functional Grammar. 3
ed.London: Arnold, 2004.

HANNAFIN, M. J.; LAND, S. M. The foundations and assumptions of
technologyenhanced student-centered learning environments. Instructional
science, 25(3), p. 167- 202, 1997.

JENKINS, J. The Phonology of English as an International Language. Oxford:
University Press, 2000.

JENKINS, J. English as a lingua franca: Interpretations and attitudes. World
Englishes, 28(2), p. 200-207, 2009.

KACHRU, B. B. The other tongue: English across cultures. Illinois: University
of Illinois Press, 1992.

KECSKES, I. Dueling contexts: A dynamic model of meaning. Journal of
Pragmatics, 40(3), p. 385-406, 2008.

LARSEN-FREEMAN, D.; ANDERSON, M. Techniques and Principles in Language
Teaching.UK: Oxford University Press, 2013.

LEE, C. F. K. et al. Web-based teaching and English language teaching: A Hong
Kong experience. Hong Kong: The Chinese University Press, 2005.

LEFFA, V. J. Metodologia do ensino de línguas. In: BOHN, H.; ANDRESEN, P.
Tópicos em lingüística aplicada: O ensino de línguas estrangeiras.
Florianópolis: Ed. da UFSC, 1988, p. 211-236.

MARTIN, J. R. Beyond exchange: Appraisal systems in English. Evaluation in
text: Authorial stance and the construction of discourse, Oxford: Oxford
University Press, p. 142-175, 2000.

MARTIN, J. R.; WHITE, P. R. The language of evaluation. London: Palgrave
Macmillan, 2003.

MASLOW, A. H. A Theory of Human Motivation. Psychological Review. 50(4),
370-96, 1943.

McKAY, S. L. Teaching English as an international language: Rethinking goals
and perspectives. New York: Oxford University Press, 2003.

O’DOWD, R. (Ed.). Online intercultural exchange: An introduction for foreign
language teachers. United Kingdom, Bristol: Multilingual Matters. Vol. 15,
2007.

O’REILLY, T. What is Web 2.0: Design patterns and business models for the next
generation of software. Communications & strategies, (1), 17, 2007.

RAMOS, M. Possibilidades e desafios na organização do currículo integrado. In:
Ensino médio integrado: concepção e contradições. São Paulo: Cortez, 2005, p.
106-127.

RICHARDS, J. C.; RODGERS, T. S. Approaches and Methods in Language Teaching.
UK: Cambridge University Press, 1986.

RICHARDS, J. C.; RODGERS, T. S. Approaches and methods in language teaching.
UK: Cambridge University Press, 2014.

SCHMID, R. F., et al. The effects of technology use in postsecondary education:
A metaanalysis of classroom applications. Computers & Education, 72, p.
271-291, 2014.

SPICER-ESCALANTE, M. L. Revising our Curriculum/Empowering Students: Teachers
‘Preparation and Perceptions about Bilingual Writing. Theory and Practice in
Language Studies, UK: Academy Publisher, 1(11), p. 1453-1458, 2011.

STAKER, H.; HORN, M. B. Classifying K-12 Blended Learning. Mountain View, CA:
Innosight Institute. 2012.

TALMY, L. Path to realization: A typology of event conflation. In: Annual
Meeting of the Berkeley Linguistics Society. Vol. 17, 2012.

THORNE, K. Blended learning: how to integrate online & traditional learning.
UK, London: Kogan Page Publishers, 2003.

VYGOTSKY L. S. The genesis of higher mental functions. The concept of activity
in Soviet psychology. Armonk, NY: M. E. Sharpe, 1981, p. 144–188.

WERTSCH, J. W. The zone of proximal development: Some conceptual issues. New
directions for child development. Children's learning in the “zone of proximal
development”. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, n. 23, p. 7-18, 1984.

ZIMMERMAN, B. J. Self-regulated learning and academic achievement: An overview.
Educational psychologist, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc., 25(1), p. 3-17,
1990.

[cover_issu]

Downloads

  • PDF

Publicado

2017-12-28

Como Citar

DE OLIVEIRA, U. T. V. Ensino de línguas em Blended e Tandem com parceiros
brasileiros: modelos de ensino flexíveis. Texto Livre, Belo Horizonte-MG, v.
10, n. 2, p. 123–144, 2017. DOI: 10.17851/1983-3652.10.2.123-144. Disponível
em: https://periodicos.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre/article/view/16765. Acesso
em: 18 maio. 2022.
Fomatos de Citação

  • ACM
  • ACS
  • APA
  • ABNT
  • Chicago
  • Harvard
  • IEEE
  • MLA
  • Turabian
  • Vancouver

Baixar Citação

  • Endnote/Zotero/Mendeley (RIS)
  • BibTeX

Edição

v. 10 n. 2 (2017): Texto Livre: Linguagem e Tecnologia

Seção

Educação e Tecnologia

Licença

Este é um artigo em acesso aberto que permite o uso irrestrito, a distribuição
e reprodução em qualquer meio desde que o artigo original seja devidamente
citado.

Enviar Submissão

Enviar Submissão

Idioma

  • English
  • Español (España)
  • Français (France)
  • Português (Brasil)

Palavras-chave

ISSN 1983-3652

 

Contato:

revista@textolivre.org

 

Redes sociais

Instagram

Facebook

Twitter

 

Qualis Capes (2013-2016)

B2 Linguística e Literarua

B2 Interdisciplinar

 

SCImago Journal & Country Rank

Redib Widget

Journal Citation Indicator (JCI)
Rank 2020: 202/354
Q3
JCI Percentile 43.40

[ImagemInde]

[scielo]

[logo-redal]

[ndice]

[dialnet-grande]

[dora2]

[cariniana]

Diadorim verde

Informações

  • Para Leitores
  • Para Autores
  • Para Bibliotecários

Texto Livre, Belo Horizonte (MG) - ISSN 1983-3652
Faculdade de Letras da Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais

Av. Antônio Carlos, 6627 - Pampulha

31270-901 - Belo Horizonte - MG - Brasil

Licença Creative Commons
Esta obra está licenciada com uma Licença Creative Commons Atribuição 4.0
Internacional.
Mais informações sobre o sistema de publicação, a plataforma e o fluxo de
publicação do OJS/PKP.
