Ir para o conteúdo principal Ir para o menu de navegação principal Ir para o
rodapé
Open Menu
Logo da Texto Livre

  • Sobre
      □ Sobre a Revista
      □ Submissões
      □ Equipe Editorial
      □ Direitos Autorais
      □ Política contra plágio e más-condutas em pesquisa
      □ Periodicidade
      □ Conflito de interesses
      □ Guia para submissão de figuras
      □ Contato
  • Edição Atual
  • Edições anteriores
  • Indexadores
  • Notícias

[                    ] Buscar
Buscar  
  • Cadastro
  • Acesso

[                    ] Buscar
Buscar  
 1. Início /
 2. Arquivos /
 3. v. 8 n. 1 (2015): Texto Livre: Linguagem e Tecnologia /
 4. Linguística e Tecnologia

Pope, interrupted. A qualitative study on memes, hashtags, and speech chains

Autores

  • Marcus Vinicius Avelar University of Colorado

DOI:

https://doi.org/10.17851/1983-3652.8.1.1-24

Palavras-chave:

Twitter. Speech chains. Hashtags. Memes.

Resumo

ABSTRACT: This article investigates the reaction, on Twitter, to Pope Benedict
XVI’s resignation announcement. Specifically, this is a qualitative study in
linguistic anthropology of how memes and hashtags circulated on Twitter between
the day of the announcement of said resignation and the Pope’s last day in
office, and identifies the speech chains created by them. The analysis of the
corpus showed that Twitter users' deployment of hashtags serves two purposes:
on the one hand, it creates a topic/comment structure that is later reproduced,
modified or abandoned by other users. On the other hand, hashtags function as
performative acts that create online ad hoc communities. In addition, this
article also claims that English and Romance-language users created and
circulated image and text-based memes differently, thus establishing two
language-based speech chains. In sum, this article contributes to discussions
on informational flux on online platforms by demonstrating that said flux does
have constraints, and that those constraints are related to language-based
communities of practice.

KEYWORDS: Twitter. Speech chains. Hashtags. Memes.

 

 

RESUMO: O presente trabalho investiga a reação, no Twitter, ao anúncio da
renúncia do Papa Benedito XVI. Trata-se de um estudo qualitativo, em
antropologia linguística, de como memes e hashtags circularam no Twitter entre
o anúncio da renúncia e o último dia de trabalho do Papa, com o objetivo de
identificar as cadeias de fala criadas por estes memes e hashtags. A análise do
corpus mostrou que emprego de hashtags pelos usuários do Twitter serve a dois
propósitos: por um lado, cria-se uma estrutura tópico-comentário que é, depois,
reproduzida, modificada ou abandonada por outros usuários. Por outro lado, as
hashtags funcionam como enunciados performativos que criam comunidades online.
Ademais, o presente artigo também afirma que usuários de língua inglesa e de
línguas românicas criaram e circularam memes baseados em imagens e textos de
maneiras distintas, estabelecendo, consequentemente, duas cadeias de fala
baseadas nas suas respectivas línguas. Em resumo, este artigo contribui para as
discussões sobre o fluxo informacional em plataformas online, ao demonstrar que
há restrições a esse fluxo e que tais restrições estão relacionadas às línguas
das diferentes comunidades de prática.

PALAVRAS-CHAVE: Twitter. Cadeias de fala. Hashtags.Memes.

Downloads

Não há dados estatísticos.

Biografia do Autor

Marcus Vinicius Avelar, University of Colorado

Graduado em Letras (USP, 2005) e Mestre em Linguística (Unicamp, 2008).
Atualmente cursa o doutorado na Universidade do Colorado em Boulder, onde
também leciona Linguística e participa do grupo interdiscipilnar de pesquisas &
quot;Cultura, Linguagem e Práticas Sociais&quot;. Tem experiência nas seguintes
áreas: Sociolinguística, Pragmática, Linguística Aplicada e Antropologia
Linguística.

Referências

AGHA, A. The social life of a cultural value. Language & Communication, n. 23,
p. 231- 273, 2003.

APPADURAI, A. Disjuncture and difference in the global cultural economy. Public
Culture, SAGE Publications, v. 2, n. 2, p. 1-24, 1990. Available on: http://
www.unc.edu/~jbecks/comps/pdf/appadurai_disjuncture.pdf. Accessed on: 11 nov.
2014.

BAUMAN, R.; BRIGGS, C. L. Poetics and performance as critical perspectives on
language and social life. Annual Review of Anthropology, v. 19, p. 59-88, 1990.
Available at: http://anthro.vancouver.wsu.edu/media/Course_files/
anth-490-edward-h-hagen/
bauman-and-briggs-1990-poetics-and-performance-as-critical-perspectives-on-language-and-social-life.pdf
. Accessed on: 11 nov. 2014.

BECKER, H.; NAAMAN, M.; GRAVANO, L. Beyond trending topics: real-world event
identification on Twitter. Proceedings of the Fifth International AAAI
Conference on Weblogs and Social Media, p. 438-441, 2011. Available at: http://
www.cs.columbia.edu/~gravano/Papers/2011/icwsm11-a.pdf. Accessed on: 12 nov.
2014.

BOELLSTORFF, T. Dubbing culture: Indonesian gay and lesbi subjectivities and
ethnography in an already globalized world. American Ethnologist, v. 30, n. 2,
p. 225-242, 2003. Available on: http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1525/
ae.2003.30.2.225/abstract. Accessed on: 12 nov. 2014.

BRUNS, A. How long is a tweet? Mapping dynamic conversation networks on Twitter
using Gawk and Gephi. Information, Communication & Society, v. 15, n. 9, p.
323-1351, 2012. Available at: http://www.academia.edu/2342309/
How_Long_Is_a_Tweet_Mapping_Dynamic_Conversation_Networks_on_Twitter_Using_Gawk_and_Gephi
. Accessed on: 11 nov. 2014. BRUNS, A.; BURGESS, J. E. The use of Twitter
hashtags in the formation of ad hoc publics. 6 th European Consortium for
Political Research General Conference, 25-27 August 2011, University of
Iceland, Reykjavik. p. 1-9, 2011. Available at: http://snurb.info/files/2011/
The%20Use%20of%20Twitter%20Hashtags%20in%20the%20Formation%20of%20Ad%20Hoc%20Publics%20
(final).pdf. Accessed on: 12 nov. 2014.

CHEONG, M. “What are you tweeting about?”: A survey of trending topics within
Twitter”. Tech. Rep., Clayton School of Information and Technology, Monash
University, v. 251, p. 1-12, 2009. Available at: http://www.csse.monash.edu.au/
publications/2009/tr-2009-251-full.pdf. Accessed on: 12 nov. 2014.

DELEUZE, G.; GUATTARI, F. A thousand plateaus. Capitalism and schizophrenia.
Translation and foreword by Brian Massumi. Minneapolis: The University of
Minnesota Press, 1987[1980].

FREEMAN, C. Is local: global as feminine:masculine? Rethinking the gender of
globalization. Signs, v. 26, n. 4, p. 1007-1037, 2001. Available at: http://
www.jstor.org/discover/10.2307/3175355?uid=2&uid=4&sid=21106462946801. Accessed
on: 11 nov. 2014.

HUANG, J.; THORNTON, K. M.; EFTHIMIADIS, E. N. Conversational tagging in
Twitter..ACM Conference on Hypertext and Hypermedia, 21. Proceedings... New
York: ACM - Association for Computing Machinery,, 2010. p. 173-178. Available
at: http://jeffhuang.com/Final_TwitterTagging_HT10.pdf. Accessed on: 11 nov.
2014.

JACQUEMET, M. Transidiomatic practices: language and power in the age of
globalization. Language and Communication, v. 25, p. 257-277, 2005. Available
at: http://www.letras.ufrj.br/linguisticaaplicada/gtidentidade/docs/recom/
jaquemet.pdf. Accessed on: 03 jul. 2015.

NAAMAN, M.; BECKER, H.; GRAVANO, L. Hip and trendy: characterizing emerging
trends on Twitter. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and
Technology, v. 62, n. 5, p. 902-918, may 2011. Available on: http://
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/asi.21489/full. Accessed on: 12 nov. 2014.
PONTORIERO, D.; GILLE, E. “Binders full of women: convergence of
independentlygenerated hashtags on Twitter”. Available at: http://
snap.stanford.edu/class/cs224w-2012/projects/cs224w-048-final.v01.pdf. Accessed
on: 28 February 2013 (s/d).

SEARGENT, P.; TAGG, C. English on the Internet and a “post-varieties” approach
to language. World Englishes, v. 30, n. 4, p. 496-514, 2011. Available at:
http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-971X.2011.01730.x/abstract.
Accessed on: 03 jul. 2015.

SIMMONS, M. P.; ADAMIC, L. A.; ADAR, E. Memes online: extracted, subtracted,
injected, and recollected. Proceedings of the Fifth International AAAI
Conference on Weblogs and Social Media, p. 353-360, 2011. Available at: http://
www-personal.umich.edu/~ladamic/papers/mememutation/mememutation.pdf. Accessed
on: 03 jul. 2015.

SPITULNIK, D. The social circulation of media discourse and the mediation of
communities. Journal of Linguistic Anthropology, v. 6, n. 2, p. 161-187, 1997.
Available at: http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1525/jlin.1996.6.2.161/
abstract. Accessed on: 03 jul. 2015.

SQUIRES, L. Enregistering Internet language. Language in Society, v. 39, p.
457-492, 2010. Available at: http://journals.cambridge.org/action/
displayAbstract?fromPage=online&aid=7873122&fileId=S0047404510000412. Accessed
on: 03 jul. 2015.

TSING, A. The global situation. Cultural Anthropology, v. 15, n. 3, p.327-360,
2000. Available at: http://courses.washington.edu/globfut/TsingCA.pdf. Accessed
on: 03 jul. 2015.

ZAPPAVIGNA, M. Ambient affiliation: a linguistic perspective on Twitter. New
Media and Society, v. 13, n. 5, p. 788-806, 2011. Available at: http://
williamwolff.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/09/zappavigna-twitter-ambient-2011.pdf
. Accessed on: 03 jul. 2015. ZAPPAVIGNA, M. Internet memes. In: ZAPPAVIGNA, M.
Discourse of Twitter and social media: how we use language to create
affiliation on the web. New York: Continuum, 2012. p. 100-126.

ZUBIAGA, A.; FRESNO, V.; SPINA, D.; MARTÍNEZ, R. Classifying trending topics: a
typology of conversational triggers on Twitter. 20th ACM INTERNATIONAL
CONFERENCE ON INFORMATION AND KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT. Proceedings... New York:
ACM - Association for Computing Machinery, 2011. p. 2461-2464. Available at:
http://nlp.uned.es/~damiano/pdf/zubiaga2011trendingtopics.pdf. Accessed on: 03
jul. 2015.

[cover_issu]

Downloads

  • PDF (English)

Publicado

2015-07-31

Como Citar

AVELAR, M. V. Pope, interrupted. A qualitative study on memes, hashtags, and
speech chains. Texto Livre, Belo Horizonte-MG, v. 8, n. 1, p. 1–24, 2015. DOI:
10.17851/1983-3652.8.1.1-24. Disponível em: https://periodicos.ufmg.br/
index.php/textolivre/article/view/16684. Acesso em: 18 maio. 2022.
Fomatos de Citação

  • ACM
  • ACS
  • APA
  • ABNT
  • Chicago
  • Harvard
  • IEEE
  • MLA
  • Turabian
  • Vancouver

Baixar Citação

  • Endnote/Zotero/Mendeley (RIS)
  • BibTeX

Edição

v. 8 n. 1 (2015): Texto Livre: Linguagem e Tecnologia

Seção

Linguística e Tecnologia

Licença

Este é um artigo em acesso aberto que permite o uso irrestrito, a distribuição
e reprodução em qualquer meio desde que o artigo original seja devidamente
citado.

Enviar Submissão

Enviar Submissão

Idioma

  • English
  • Español (España)
  • Français (France)
  • Português (Brasil)

Palavras-chave

ISSN 1983-3652

 

Contato:

revista@textolivre.org

 

Redes sociais

Instagram

Facebook

Twitter

 

Qualis Capes (2013-2016)

B2 Linguística e Literarua

B2 Interdisciplinar

 

SCImago Journal & Country Rank

Redib Widget

Journal Citation Indicator (JCI)
Rank 2020: 202/354
Q3
JCI Percentile 43.40

[ImagemInde]

[scielo]

[logo-redal]

[ndice]

[dialnet-grande]

[dora2]

[cariniana]

Diadorim verde

Informações

  • Para Leitores
  • Para Autores
  • Para Bibliotecários

Texto Livre, Belo Horizonte (MG) - ISSN 1983-3652
Faculdade de Letras da Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais

Av. Antônio Carlos, 6627 - Pampulha

31270-901 - Belo Horizonte - MG - Brasil

Licença Creative Commons
Esta obra está licenciada com uma Licença Creative Commons Atribuição 4.0
Internacional.
Mais informações sobre o sistema de publicação, a plataforma e o fluxo de
publicação do OJS/PKP.
