Ir para o conteúdo principal Ir para o menu de navegação principal Ir para o
rodapé
Open Menu
Logo da Texto Livre

  • Sobre
      □ Sobre a Revista
      □ Submissões
      □ Equipe Editorial
      □ Direitos Autorais
      □ Política contra plágio e más-condutas em pesquisa
      □ Periodicidade
      □ Conflito de interesses
      □ Guia para submissão de figuras
      □ Contato
  • Edição Atual
  • Edições anteriores
  • Indexadores
  • Notícias

[                    ] Buscar
Buscar  
  • Cadastro
  • Acesso

[                    ] Buscar
Buscar  
 1. Início /
 2. Arquivos /
 3. v. 12 n. 3 (2019): Texto Livre: Linguagem e Tecnologia /
 4. Linguística e Tecnologia

Evolución científica de la enseñanza de lenguas en el contexto universitario
(1900-2019)

Autores

  • Antonio-Manuel Rodríguez-García Universidad de Granada https://orcid.org/
    0000-0003-3394-2777
  • María Aránzazu Fernández Mora Universidad Nacional de Educación a Distancia
    (Ceuta). https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4523-1139
  • Antonio José Moreno Guerrero Universidad de Granada https://orcid.org/
    0000-0003-3191-2048

DOI:

https://doi.org/10.17851/1983-3652.12.3.16-36

Palavras-chave:

enseñanza de idiomas, universidad, educación superior, revisión sistemática.

Resumo

RESUMEN: Este artículo tiene por objetivo analizar la evolución de la
investigación sobre enseñanza de lenguas en el ámbito universitario dentro de
la colección principal de la Web of Science (1900-2019). Para ello, se ha
desarrollado un estudio bibliométrico por revisión sistemática, tomando en
consideración los siguientes indicadores: producción diacrónica, geográfica,
autores y de fuente. A su vez, se ha realizado un análisis del desarrollo
estructural de los temas sobre una muestra de 2978 referencias procedentes de
seis búsquedas combinadas. Los análisis realizados determinan un patrón de
crecimiento exponencial de la literatura científica sobre la enseñanza de
idiomas en el ámbito universitario durante la última década (2010-2019);
período que contempla el 87,2% de la producción científica actual. En relación
a la evolución de los temas del campo, se observa que las líneas de
investigación actual se están centrando mayormente en la introducción de la
tecnología para el apoyo de la enseñanza de idiomas en el contexto
universitario.

PALABRAS CLAVE: ^enseñanza de idiomas; universidad; educación superior;
revisión sistemática.

 

ABSTRACT: The aim of this article is to analyse the evolution of research on
language teaching at the university level within the main collection of the Web
of Science (1900-2019). To this end, a bibliometric study has been developed
through systematic review, taking into consideration the following indicators:
diachronic, geographical, authors and source productions. At the same time, an
analysis of the structural development of the topics has been carried out on a
sample of 2978 references from six combined searches. The analyses carried out
determine an exponential growth pattern in the scientific literature on
language teaching in universities over the last decade (2010-2019), a period
that covers 87.2% of the current scientific production. In relation to the
evolution of topics in the field, it is observed that current lines of research
are focusing mainly on the introduction of technology to support language
teaching in the university context.

KEYWORDS: ^language teaching; university; higher education; systematic review.

Downloads

Não há dados estatísticos.

Biografia do Autor

Antonio-Manuel Rodríguez-García, Universidad de Granada

Universidad de Granada

Antonio José Moreno Guerrero, Universidad de Granada

Universidad de Granada

Referências

ÁLVAREZ, G. La educación comparada más allá de la REEC: análisis bibliométrico
de la disciplina en las cinco revistas españolas afines de más impacto entre
1995 y 2014. Revista Española de Educación Comparada, n. 25, p. 19-45, 2015.
doi: 10.5944/reec.25.2015.14782.

CALLON, M.; COURTIAL, J. P.; LAVILLE, F. Co-word analysis as a tool for
describing the network of interactions between basic and technological
research: The case of polumer chemsitry. Sciencitometric, v. 1, n. 22, p.
155-205, 1991. doi: 10.1007/BF02019280.

COBO, M. J. LÓPEZ, A. G.; HERRERA, E.; HERRERA, F. Science mapping software
tools: Review, analysis, and cooperative study among tools. Journal of the
American Society for Information Science and Technology, v. 62, n.7, p.
1382-1402, 2011. doi: 10.1002/asi.21525.

COBO, M. J.; LÓPEZ, A. G.; HERRERA, E.; HERRERA, F. SciMAT: A new science
mapping analysis software tool. Journal of American Society for Information
Science and Technology, v.63, n. 8, p. 1609-1630, 2012. doi: 10.1002/asi.22688.

DURHAM, L.; KIM, S. Training dilemmas and recommendations with volunteer
instructors in small, faith-based adult ESL programs. TESOL Journal, v. 10,
n.1, p. 1-11, 2019.

CROMPTON, H.; BURKE, D. The use of mobile learning in higher education: A
systematic review. Computers & Education, n. 123, p. 53-64, 2018.

ELKINS, M. R.; MAHER, C. G.; HERBERT, R. D. MOSELEY, A. M.; SHERRINGTON, C.
Correlation between the journal impact factor and three other journal citation
indices. Scientometrics, n. 85, p. 81-93, 2010. doi: 10.1007/s11192-010-0262-0.

FRANCESCHET, M. Journal influence factors. Journal of Informetrics, v. 3, n. 4,
p. 239-248, 2010. doi: 10.1016/j.joi.2009.12.002.

FRANCIOSI, S. The Effect of Computer Game-Based Learning on FL Vocabulary
Transferability. Educational Technology & Society, v. 20, n. 1, p. 123-133,
2017.

GIMÉNEZ‐ESPERT, M. C.; PRADO‐GASCÓ, V. J. Bibliometric analysis of six nursing
journals from the Web of Science, 2012–2017. Journal of advanced nursing, 75
(3), p. 543- 554, 2019.

GROVES. M.; MUNDT, K. Friend or foe? Google Translate in language for academic
purposes. English for specific purporses, n. 37, p. 112-121, 2015 doi: 10.1016/
j.esp.2014.09.001.

HAFNER, C. A. Remix Culture and English Language Teaching: The Expression of
Learner Voice in Digital Multimodal Compositions. Tesol quarterly, v. 49, n.3,
p. 486-509, 2015. doi: 10.1002/tesq.238.

HINOJO, F. J.; AZNAR, I.; ROMERO, J. M. Dispositivos móviles para el
aprendizaje: análisis de la investigación doctoral sobre mobile learning en
España. Texto livre: Linguagem e Tecnologia, v. 11, n. 3, p. 154-175, 2018.
http://dx.doi.org/10.17851/1983- 3652.11.3.154-175.

HIRSCH, J. E. An index to quantify an individual´s scientific research output.
Proceedings of National Academy of Sciences, v. 102, n. 46, p. 16569-16572,
2005. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0507655102.

HUNG, H. T.; YANG, J. C.; HWANG, G. J.; CHU, H. C.; WANG, C. C. A scoping
review of research on digital game-based language learning. Computers &
Education, n. 126, p. 89- 104, 2018. doi: 10.1016/j.compedu.2018.07.001.

HUTTO, B.; CATALÁ, F.; MOHER, D. La extensión de la declaración PRISMA para
revisiones sistemáticas que incorporan metaanálisis en red: PRISMA-NMA.
Medicina Clínica, v. 147, n. 6, p. 262-266, 2016. doi: 10.1016/
j.medcli.2016.02.025.

KING, J. "It's Time, Put on the Smile, It's Time!": The Emotional Labour of
Second Language Teaching Within a Japanese University. En: GKONOU, C.; TATZL,
D.; MERCER, S. (ed.), New directions in language learning phychology, p.
97-112, 2016. New York: Springer.

LANVERS, U. Contradictory Others and the Habitus of Languages: Surveying the L2
Motivation Landscape in the United Kingdom. Modern Language Journal, v. 101, n.
3, p. 517-532, 2017 doi: 10.1111/modl.12410.

LO BIANCO, J. Domesticating the foreign: globalization’s effects on the place/s
of languages. Modern Language Journal, n. 98, p. 312–325, 2014. doi: 10.1111/
j.1540- 4781.2014.12063.x.

LOPEZ, E.; VAZQUEZ, E.; SARASOLA, J. L. Estudio Bibliométrico Pixel-Bit.
Revista de Medios y Educación (2000-2013). Pixel-Bit. Revista de Medios y
Educación, n. 46, p. 65-85, 2015. doi: 10.12795/pixelbit.2015.i46.05.

MANTOU, N.; NOELS, K. A. Measuring Language Mindsets and Modeling Their
Relations With Goal Orientations and Emotional and Behavioral Responses in
Failure Situations. The Modern Language Journal, v. 101, n. 1, p. 212-243,
2017. doi: 10.1111/modl.12380.

MAHAPATRA, S.; MISHRA, S. Articulating identities - the role of English
language education in Indian universities. Teaching in higher education, v. 24,
n.3, 346-360, 2019. doi: 10.1080/13562517.2018.1547277.

MONTERO, J.; COBO, M. J.; GUTIÉRREZ, M.; SEGADO, F.; HERRERA, E. Mapeo
científico de la Categoría “Comunicación” en WoS (1980-2013). Comunicar, v. 55,
n. 26, 81- 91, 2018. doi: 10.3916/C55-2018-08.

QUEVEDO, R.; LÓPEZ, W. Análisis bibliométrico de las revistas
multidisciplinares de psicología incorporadas en la Web of Science (2008-2009).
Psicología: Reflexao e Crítica, v. 23, n. 2, p. 384-408, 2010.

RODRÍGUEZ, A. M.; TRUJILLO, J. M.; SÁNCHEZ, J. Impacto de la productividad
científica sobre competencia digital de los futuros docentes: aproximación
bibliométrica en Scopus y Web of Science. Revista Complutense de Educación, v.
30, n. 2, p. 623-646, 2019. doi: 10.5209/RCED.58862.

RODRÍGUEZ, A. M.; RASO F.; RUIZ, J. Competencia digital, educación superior y
formación del profesorado: un estudio de meta-análisis en la Web of Science.
Pixel-Bit. Revista de Medios de Comunicación, n. 54, p. 65-81, 2019. doi:
10.12795/pixelbit.2019.i54.04.

ROSE, H.; MCKINLEY, J. Japan’s English-medium instruction initiatives and the
globalization of higher education. Higher Education, v. 75, n.1, p. 111-129,
2018. doi: 10.1007/s10734-017-0125-1.

RISUEÑO, J. J.; VÁZQUEZ, M. L.; HIDALGO, J.; DE LA BLANCA, S. Language learning
strategy use by spanish efl students: the effect of proficiency level, gender,
and motivation. Revista de Investigación Educativa, v. 34, n. 1, p. 133-149,
2016. doi: 10.6018/rie.34.1.232981.

RUIZ, R.; DELGADO, E.; JIMÉNEZ, E. Principios y criterios utilizados en España
por la Comisión Nacional Evaluadora de la Actividad Investigadora (CNEAI) para
la valoración de las publicaciones científicas: 1989-2009. Psicothema, n. 222,
p. 898-908, 2010.

TODESCHINI, R.; BACCINI, A. Handbook of Bibliometric Indicators: Quantitative
Tools for Studying and Evaluating Research. Milano: Wiley-VCH, 2016.

VELASCO, B.; EIROS, J. M.; PINILLA, J. M.; SAN ROMÁN, J. A. La utilización de
indicadores bibliométricos para evaluar la actividad investigadora. Aula
Abierta, v. 40, n. 2, p. 75-84, 2012.

ZHENG, Y.; GUO, X. Publishing in and about English: challenges and
opportunities of Chinese multilingual scholars' language practices in academic
publishing. Language Policy, v. 18, n. 1, p. 107-130, 2019. doi: 10.1007/
s10993-018-9464-8.

ZYCH, I.; BUELA, G. Internacionalidad de las revistas de Psicología
Multidisciplinar editadas en Iberoamérica e incluidas en la Web of Science.
Universitas Psychologica, n. 9, p. 27-34, 2010.

[cover_issu]

Downloads

  • PDF (Español (España))

Publicado

2019-10-09

Como Citar

RODRÍGUEZ-GARCÍA, A.-M.; FERNÁNDEZ MORA, M. A.; MORENO GUERRERO, A. J.
Evolución científica de la enseñanza de lenguas en el contexto universitario
(1900-2019) . Texto Livre, Belo Horizonte-MG, v. 12, n. 3, p. 16–36, 2019. DOI:
10.17851/1983-3652.12.3.16-36. Disponível em: https://periodicos.ufmg.br/
index.php/textolivre/article/view/16854. Acesso em: 18 maio. 2022.
Fomatos de Citação

  • ACM
  • ACS
  • APA
  • ABNT
  • Chicago
  • Harvard
  • IEEE
  • MLA
  • Turabian
  • Vancouver

Baixar Citação

  • Endnote/Zotero/Mendeley (RIS)
  • BibTeX

Edição

v. 12 n. 3 (2019): Texto Livre: Linguagem e Tecnologia

Seção

Linguística e Tecnologia

Licença

Este é um artigo em acesso aberto que permite o uso irrestrito, a distribuição
e reprodução em qualquer meio desde que o artigo original seja devidamente
citado.

Enviar Submissão

Enviar Submissão

Idioma

  • English
  • Español (España)
  • Français (France)
  • Português (Brasil)

Palavras-chave

ISSN 1983-3652

 

Contato:

revista@textolivre.org

 

Redes sociais

Instagram

Facebook

Twitter

 

Qualis Capes (2013-2016)

B2 Linguística e Literarua

B2 Interdisciplinar

 

SCImago Journal & Country Rank

Redib Widget

Journal Citation Indicator (JCI)
Rank 2020: 202/354
Q3
JCI Percentile 43.40

[ImagemInde]

[scielo]

[logo-redal]

[ndice]

[dialnet-grande]

[dora2]

[cariniana]

Diadorim verde

Informações

  • Para Leitores
  • Para Autores
  • Para Bibliotecários

Texto Livre, Belo Horizonte (MG) - ISSN 1983-3652
Faculdade de Letras da Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais

Av. Antônio Carlos, 6627 - Pampulha

31270-901 - Belo Horizonte - MG - Brasil

Licença Creative Commons
Esta obra está licenciada com uma Licença Creative Commons Atribuição 4.0
Internacional.
Mais informações sobre o sistema de publicação, a plataforma e o fluxo de
publicação do OJS/PKP.
