Ir para o conteúdo principal Ir para o menu de navegação principal Ir para o
rodapé
Open Menu
Logo da Texto Livre

  • Sobre
      □ Sobre a Revista
      □ Submissões
      □ Equipe Editorial
      □ Direitos Autorais
      □ Política contra plágio e más-condutas em pesquisa
      □ Periodicidade
      □ Conflito de interesses
      □ Guia para submissão de figuras
      □ Contato
  • Edição Atual
  • Edições anteriores
  • Indexadores
  • Notícias

[                    ] Buscar
Buscar  
  • Cadastro
  • Acesso

[                    ] Buscar
Buscar  
 1. Início /
 2. Arquivos /
 3. v. 11 n. 3 (2018): Texto Livre: Linguagem e Tecnologia /
 4. Linguística e Tecnologia

Pre-service language teacher training for distance education

Autores

  • Emeli Borges Pereira Luz Universidade Federal de Uberlândia

DOI:

https://doi.org/10.17851/1983-3652.11.3.26-39

Palavras-chave:

pre-service training, distance education, TPACK, public universities.

Resumo

ABSTRACT:This research questions whether English language teaching courses
offered by Brazilian public universities equip the next generation of teachers
with the necessary skills to teach via distance learning through online
environments. The methodology used is quantitative in nature and considers 118
universities that offer English Language and Literature courses. Their
curricula were analyzed solely to investigate if the courses offered any
modules related to distance learning. Only four institutions propose entire
modules that deal with distance education although they are elective. In order
to propose an alternative to this issue, a suite of three modules related to
technology, distance teaching and learning are presented. TPACK model was used
as a guide to analyze the proposed modules. The development of the modules
could establish a more solid and holistic pre-service teacher education, so
that pre-service teachers can be prepared to teach in online and blended
environments.

KEYWORDS: pre-service training; distance education; TPACK; public universities.

 

RESUMO:Esta pesquisa questiona se os cursos de ensino de inglês oferecidos por
Universidades Públicas Brasileiras equipam a próxima geração de professores com
as habilidades necessárias para ensinar via educação a distância através de
ambientes online. A metodologia utilizada é de natureza quantitativa e
considera 118 universidades que oferecem graduação em Língua e Literatura
Inglesa. Os respectivos currículos foram analisados unicamente para investigar
se os cursos ofereciam módulos relacionados ao ensino a distância. Apenas
quatro instituições propõem módulos inteiros que lidam com educação a
distância, embora sejam eletivos. Para propor uma alternativa a essa questão, é
apresentado um conjunto de três módulos relacionados à tecnologia, ensino a
distância e aprendizado. O modelo TPACK foi utilizado como um guia para
analisar os módulos propostos. O desenvolvimento dos módulos pode estabelecer
uma formação de professores pré-serviço mais sólida e holística, para que os
professores possam estar preparados para ensinar em ambientes online e
híbridos.

PALAVRAS-CHAVE: formação pré-serviço; educação a distância; TPACK;
universidades públicas.

Downloads

Não há dados estatísticos.

Biografia do Autor

Emeli Borges Pereira Luz, Universidade Federal de Uberlândia

ILEEL

Referências

ABBITT, J. T. Measuring technological pedagogical content knowledge in
preservice teacher education: A review of current methods and instruments.
Journal of Research on Technology in Education, v. 43, n. 4, p. 281-300, 2011.

ARCHAMBAULT, L.; CRIPPEN, K. K-12 distance educators at work: who’s teaching
online across the United States. Journal of Research on Technology in
Education, v. 41, n. 4, p. 363-391, 2009.

ARINTO, P. B. A framework for developing competencies in open and distance
learning. The international review of research in open and distance learning,
v. 14, n. 1, p. 167-185, 2013.

BADIA, A.; GARCIA, C.; MENESES, J. Approaches to teaching online: Exploring
factors influencing teacher in a fully online university. British Journal of
Education Technology. v.48 n.6, p. 1193-1207, 2017.

BARAN, E.; CORREIA, A.; THOMPSON, A. Transforming online teaching practice:
critical analysis of the literature on the roles and competencies of online
teachers. Distance Education, v. 32, n. 3, p. 421-439, 2011.

BORUP, J.; GRAHAM, C. R.; DRYSDALE, J.S. The nature of teacher engagement at an
online high school. British Journal of Educational Technology, v. 45, n. 5, p.
793-806, 2014.

BRANTLEY-DIAS, L.; ERTMER, P. A. Goldilocks and TPACK: Is the construct “Just
Right?”. Journal of Research on Technology in Education, v. 46, n. 2, p.
103-128, 2013.

CHARBONNEAU-GOWDY, P.; SALINAS, D.; PIZARRO, J. Moving away from comfort zones:
working in community with teacher educators to promote e-learning
classroombased research. Proceeding of the 15th European Conference on
e-Learning, p. 129-137, 2016.

COMAS-QUINN, A. Learning to teach online or learning to become an online
teacher: an exploration of teacher’s experiences in a blended learning course.
ReCALL v. 23, n. 3, p. 218-232, 2011.

DECREE 9057. Disponível em: http://www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil_03/_ato2015-2018/
2017/decreto/D9057.htm. Acesso em: 10 mai. 2018.

DEYA, B.; KOPCHA, T. J.; OZDEN, M.Y. Developing a technological pedagogical
content knowledge (TPACK) assessment for preservice teachers learning to teach
English as a foreign language. Computer Assisted Language Learning, v. 29, n.4,
p. 749-764, 2015.

DÍAZ, A. R.; HORTIGUERA, H. TELL-ING IT LIKE IT IS: Practical implications from
a critical stance on technology-enhanced language learning. Revista de Lenguas
para fines Específicos, v. 22, n. 1, p. 54-79, 2016.

DORNER, H.; KUMAR, S. Online collaborative mentoring for technology integration
in preservice teacher education. Tech Trends, v. 60, p. 48-55, 2016.

EDUCATION FIRST ENGLISH PROFICIENCY INDEX. Disponível em: https://www.ef.co.uk/
epi/regions/latin-america/brazil/. Acesso em: 15 dez. 2017.

ETHNOLOGUE. Ethnologue Languages of the world. Disponível em: https://
www.ethnologue.com/. Acesso em: 15 dez. 2017.

FOLHA UNIVERSITY RANKING. Course ranking. Disponível em: http://
ruf.folha.uol.com.br/2017/lista/?extra[tab]=cursos;extra[course]=33;extra[type]
=1. Acesso em: 20 abr. 2018.

GUILHERME, M. F. F.; TAVARES, C. N. V.; BERTOLDO, E. S.; SANTOS, J. B. C.;
MAGALHÃES, M. C. C. Projeto Pedagógico do Curso de Graduação em Letras: Inglês
e Literaturas de Língua Inglesa. Uberlândia, 2017.

HAWKINS, A.; GRAHAM, C.R.; BARBOUR, M. K. “Everybody is their own island”:
Teacher disconnection in a virtual school. The International Review of Research
in Open and Distance Learning. v. 13, n. 2, p. 123-144, 2012.

HERRING, M.; KOEHLER, M. J.; MISHRA, P. (Eds). Handbook of technological
pedagogical content knowledge. 2. ed. New York: Routledge, 2016.

HOFER, M.; GRANDGENETT, N. TPACK development in teacher education: A
longitudinal study of preservice teacher in a secondary M. A. Ed program.
Journal of Research on Technology in Education, v. 45, n. 1, p. 83-106, 2012.

IBGE. Estimativas de população. Disponível em: https://www.ibge.gov.br/
estatisticas-novoportal/sociais/populacao/9103-estimativas-de-populacao.html.
Acesso em: 05 jun. 2018.

IGNOU – THE PEOPLE’S UNIVERSITY. About IGNOU. Disponível em: https://
onlineadmission.ignou.ac.in/admission/AboutIGNOU.aspx. Acesso em: 20 out. 2017.

KARTAL, T.; KARTAL, B.; ULUAY, G. Technological Pedagogical Content Knowledge
self assessment scale (TPACK-SAS) for pre-service teachers: development,
validity and reliability. International Journal of Eurasia Social Sciences, v.
7, n. 23, p. 1-36, 2016.

KEENGWE, J.; KANG, J. J. Preparing in-service language teachers to design and
implement technology rich curriculum. Education and Information Technologies,
v. 18, n. 4, p. 609-619, 2013.

KELLY, M.; GRENFELL, M. European profile for language teacher education: a
frame of reference. 2017. Disponível em: http://www.lang.soton.ac.uk/profile/
report/MainReport.pdf. Acesso em: 23 nov. 2017.

KENNEDY, J. Using TPCK as a scaffold to self-assess the novice online teaching
experience. Distance Education, v. 36, n. 1, p. 148-154, 2015.

KOEHLER, M. J. TPACK Explained. Disponível em: http://tpack.org/. Acesso em: 24
set. 2017.

KOEHLER, M. J.; MISHRA, P. What is technological pedagogical content knowledge?
Contemporary Issues in Technology and Teacher Education, v. 9, n. 1, p. 60-70,
2009.

KOEHLER, M. J.; MISHRA, P.; CAIN, W. What is Technological Pedagogical Content
Knowledge (TPACK). Journal of Education, v. 193, n. 3, p. 13-19, 2013.

LAW 13.415. Disponível em: http://www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil_03/_ato2015-2018/
2017/lei/l13415.htm. Acesso em: 28 out. 2017.

MIRON, G.; GULOSINO, C.; SHANK, C.; DAVIDSON, C. Virtual Schools in the U.S.
2017. Section I Full-Time Virtual and Blended Schools: Enrollment, Student
Characterisstics, and Performance, p. 6-38, 2017. Disponível em: http://
nepc.colorado.edu/publication/virtual-schools-annual-2017. Acesso em: 28 out.
2017.

MISHRA, P.; KOEHLER, M. J. Technological Pedagogical Content Knowledge: A
framework for teacher knowledge. Teachers College Record, v. 108, n. 6, p.
1017-1054, 2006.

MOORE-ADAMS. B. L.; JONES, W. M.; COHEN, J. Learning to teach online: a
systematic review of the literature on K-12 teacher preparation for teaching
online. Distance Education, v. 37, n. 3, p. 333-348, 2016.

OFFIR, B. The process of chance in education: Moving from descriptive to
prescriptive research. New York: Nova Science Publishers, 2010.

QS WORLD UNIVERSITY RANKING. QS Latin America University Rankings 2018.
Disponível em: https://www.topuniversities.com/university-rankings/
latin-american-university-rankings/2018. Acesso em: 20 fev. 2018.

RESOLUTION CNE/CP n. 2. Disponível em: http://portal.mec.gov.br/index.php?
option=com_docman;view=download;alias=70431-res-cne-cp-002-03072015-pdf;
category_slug=agosto-2017-pdf;Itemid=30192. Acesso em: 02 dez. 2017.

REYES, V. C. J.; READING, C.; DOYLE, H.; GREGORY, S. Integrating ICT into
teacher education programs from a TPACK perspective: Exploring perceptions of
university lecturers. Computer & Education, v. 115, p. 1-19, 2017.

RIENTIES, B.; BROUWER, N.; LYGO-BAKER, S. The effects of online professional
development on higher education teachers’ beliefs and intentions towards
learning facilitation and technology. Teaching and Teacher Education, v 29, p.
122-131, 2013.

SCHMIDT, D. A.; BARA, E.; MISHRA, P.; KOEHLER, M. J.; SHIN, T. S. Journal of
Research on Technology in Education, v. 42, n. 2, p. 123-149, 2009.

SHULMAN, L. S. Those who understand: Knowledge growth in teaching. Educational
Researcher, v. 15, n. 2, p. 4–14, 1986.

TIMES HIGHER EDUCATION WORLD UNIVERSITY RANKING. Latin America University
Ranking. Disponível em: https://www.timeshighereducation.com/
world-university-rankings/2017/latin-america-university-rankings#!/page/0/
length/-1/locations/BR/sort_by/rank/sort_order/asc/cols/stats. Acesso em: 02
dez. 2017.

TURCSÁNYI-SZABÓ, M. Aiming at sustainable innovation in teacher education: from
theory to practice. Informatics in Education, v. 1, n. 1, p. 115-130, 2012.

WENGROWICZ, N. Teachers’ pedagogical change mechanism – Pattern of structural
relations between teacher’s pedagogical characteristics and teachers’
perceptions of transactional distance (TTD) in different teaching environments.
Computers & Education. v. 76, p. 190-198, 2014.

WOLF, P. D. Best Practices in the Training of Faculty to Teach Online. Journal
of Computing

in Higher Education, v. 17, n. 2, p. 47-78, 2006.

Capa da revista Texto Livre, volume 11, número 3, setembro-dezembro de 2018.

Downloads

  • PDF (English)

Publicado

2018-12-26

Como Citar

LUZ, E. B. P. Pre-service language teacher training for distance education.
Texto Livre, Belo Horizonte-MG, v. 11, n. 3, p. 26–39, 2018. DOI: 10.17851/
1983-3652.11.3.26-39. Disponível em: https://periodicos.ufmg.br/index.php/
textolivre/article/view/16810. Acesso em: 18 maio. 2022.
Fomatos de Citação

  • ACM
  • ACS
  • APA
  • ABNT
  • Chicago
  • Harvard
  • IEEE
  • MLA
  • Turabian
  • Vancouver

Baixar Citação

  • Endnote/Zotero/Mendeley (RIS)
  • BibTeX

Edição

v. 11 n. 3 (2018): Texto Livre: Linguagem e Tecnologia

Seção

Linguística e Tecnologia

Licença

Este é um artigo em acesso aberto que permite o uso irrestrito, a distribuição
e reprodução em qualquer meio desde que o artigo original seja devidamente
citado.

Enviar Submissão

Enviar Submissão

Idioma

  • English
  • Español (España)
  • Français (France)
  • Português (Brasil)

Palavras-chave

ISSN 1983-3652

 

Contato:

revista@textolivre.org

 

Redes sociais

Instagram

Facebook

Twitter

 

Qualis Capes (2013-2016)

B2 Linguística e Literarua

B2 Interdisciplinar

 

SCImago Journal & Country Rank

Redib Widget

Journal Citation Indicator (JCI)
Rank 2020: 202/354
Q3
JCI Percentile 43.40

[ImagemInde]

[scielo]

[logo-redal]

[ndice]

[dialnet-grande]

[dora2]

[cariniana]

Diadorim verde

Informações

  • Para Leitores
  • Para Autores
  • Para Bibliotecários

Texto Livre, Belo Horizonte (MG) - ISSN 1983-3652
Faculdade de Letras da Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais

Av. Antônio Carlos, 6627 - Pampulha

31270-901 - Belo Horizonte - MG - Brasil

Licença Creative Commons
Esta obra está licenciada com uma Licença Creative Commons Atribuição 4.0
Internacional.
Mais informações sobre o sistema de publicação, a plataforma e o fluxo de
publicação do OJS/PKP.
